<p align="center"><img src="title.png?raw=true"/></p>

Computation Structures (6.004) is a sophomore-level subject offered by
the MIT Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science.
It's an introductory course about the design and implementation of
digital systems, emphasizing structural principles common to a wide
range of technologies.

Starting at the device level, the course develops a hierarchical set
of building blocks â€” logic gates, combinational and sequential
circuits, finite-state machines, processors and finally complete
systems. Both hardware and software mechanisms are explored through a
series of design examples. The problem sets and lab exercises are
intended to give students hands-on experience in designing digital
systems; students complete the gate-level design for a RISC processor
during the lab exercises.

This repository contains the course materials used between Fall 1995 and
Spring 2018 including the lecture slides, edited transcripts of the
lectures, and the worksheets of past quiz problems that students used
to review their understanding of the material.  We hope this material
will be of use to students interested in how computers work and to my
teaching collegues who introduce those students to the digital world.

The course materials are a collaborative effort by many MIT
colleagues.  Steve Ward was the originator of the course in the early
1980's and in many ways what you see here is his brain child.  Other
contributors over the years include Bert Halstead, Silvina Hanono
Wachman, Leonard McMillan, Greg Papadopoulos, Gill Pratt, Daniel
Sanchez, and Chris Terman.

Enjoy!

## Syllabus

* Digital Circuits

  * L01 Basics of Information: <a href="L01_Basics_of_Information.md">Lecture</a>, <a href="L01_worksheet.pdf">Worksheet</a>

  * L02 The Digital Abstraction: <a href="L02_The_Digital_Abstraction.md">Lecture</a>, <a href="L02_worksheet.pdf">Worksheet</a>

  * L03 CMOS Technology: <a href="L03_CMOS_Technology.md">Lecture</a>, <a href="L03_worksheet.pdf">Worksheet</a>

  * L04 Combinational Logic: <a href="L04_Combinational_Logic.md">Lecture</a>, <a href="L04_worksheet.pdf">Worksheet</a>

  * L05 Sequential Logic: <a href="L05_Sequential_Logic.md">Lecture</a>, <a href="L05_worksheet.pdf">Worksheet</a>

  * L06 Finite State Machines: <a href="L06_Finite_State_Machines.md">Lecture</a>, <a href="L06_worksheet.pdf">Worksheet</a>

  * L07 Pipelined Circuits: <a href="L07_Pipelined_Circuits.md">Lecture</a>, <a href="L07_worksheet.pdf">Worksheet</a>

  * L08 Design Tradeoffs: <a href="L08_Design_Tradeoffs.md">Lecture</a>, <a href="L08_worksheet.pdf">Worksheet</a>

* Programmable Architectures

  * L09 Designing an Instruction Set: <a href="L09_Designing_an_Instruction_Set.md">Lecture</a>, <a href="L09_worksheet.pdf">Worksheet</a>

  * L10a Assembly Language: <a href="L10a_Assembly_Language.md">Lecture</a>

  * L10b Models of Computation: <a href="L10b_Models_of_Computation.md">Lecture</a>

  * L11 Compilers: <a href="L11_Compilers.md">Lecture</a>, <a href="L11_worksheet.pdf">Worksheet</a>

  * L12 Procedures and Stacks: <a href="L12_Procedures_and_Stacks.md">Lecture</a>, <a href="L12_worksheet.pdf">Worksheet</a>

  * L13 Building the Beta: <a href="L13_Building_the_Beta.md">Lecture</a>, <a href="L13_worksheet.pdf">Worksheet</a>

  * L14 Caches and the Memory Hierarchy: <a href="L14_Caches_and_the_Memory_Hierarchy.md">Lecture</a>, <a href="L14_worksheet.pdf">Worksheet</a>

  * L15 Pipelining the Beta: <a href="L15_Pipelining_the_Beta.md">Lecture</a>, <a href="L15_worksheet.pdf">Worksheet</a>

* Computer Organization

  * L16 Virtual Memory: <a href="L16_Virtual_Memory.md">Lecture</a>, <a href="L16_worksheet.pdf">Worksheet</a>

  * L17 Virtualizing the Processor: <a href="L17_Virtualizing_the_Processor.md">Lecture</a>, <a href="L17_worksheet.pdf">Worksheet</a>

  * L18 Devices and Interrupts: <a href="L18_Devices_and_Interrupts.md">Lecture</a>, <a href="L18_worksheet.pdf">Worksheet</a>

  * L19 Concurrency & Synchronization: <a href="L19_Concurrency_and_Synchronization.md">Lecture</a>, <a href="L19_worksheet.pdf">Worksheet</a>

  * L20 System-level Communication: <a href="L20_System_level_Communication.md">Lecture</a>
